Good evening. Blue skies one minute,
big angry downpours the next. That’s
the kind of weather we can expect
the kind of weather we ran expect
over the
the kind of weather we can expect
over the next few days. Some heavy,
thundery showers with some sunny
spells as well, and an increasingly
warm and humid feel as we head into
the weekend. It’s all driven by low
pressure. It looks beautiful on our
satellite image, this swirl of
satellite image, this swirt of
cloud.
satellite image, this swirl of
cloud. It will be sucking up warm
and humid air
and humid airfrom the south and
and humid air from the south and
ﬂinging
and humid airfrom the south and
flinging downpours in our direction.
ﬂinging downpours in our direction.
Today, we’ve
flinging downpours in our direction.
Today, we’ve had thunderstorms
mnning along
running along the south coast and a
mnning along the south coast and a
lot of rain
running along the south coast and a
lot of rain setting and across
northern England, particularly wet
weather across north—east England
weather across north-east England
and they
weather across north—east England
and they could be localised flooding
and they could be localised ﬂooding
as rain
and they could be localised flooding
as rain continues through tonight
and into tomorrow, so a soggy start
for Northern England, Northern
Ireland. Some of that rain through
the day will get into southern and
eastern Scotland. Northern Scotland
having the best of the dry and
bright weather although a little
murky for some north—eastern coast.
murky for some north-eastern coast.
To the south,
murky for some north—eastern coast.
To the south, more heavy thundery
rain arriving through the afternoon.
Another drenching to come on what
will be another rather breezy day.
But a slightly warmer one, 18—21,
But a slightly warmer one, 18-21,
warmer
But a slightly warmer one, 18—21,
warmer that is apart from the North
Sea coasts, quite a cool feel, just
13 degrees in Newcastle. On
Saturday, more of the same, some
outbreaks of rain, some hefty shower
is particularty
is particularly heavy through the
Midlands, Wales, north—west England,
Midlands, Walas, north-west England,
some
Midlands, Wales, north—west England,
some lightning, thunder, large hail
possibla but
possible but in the sunshine
We’ve all been missing our nearest
and dearest this year,
so I thought I would
try and make this Father’s Day
that extra bit special
by asking you to spend it with me
and my nearest and dearest,
old misery guts over there. Mich...
Can you get the sign up?
Thank you. Michael Whitehall.
We hope you canjoin us.
He’s so excited.
How did last night end?
I’m starting to write
about my experiences.
First time?
Yeah.
SIRENS WAIL
HORNS BLARE
Where does it go?
Welcome to Question Time and on the
panel tonight, Robert Buckland, the
justice
Justice Secretary, formerly
Solicitor General for England and
Walas
Wales and prisoners minister,
Weiss and prisoners minister,
joining us
Wales and prisoners minister,
joining us from Cardiff, the Labour
joining us from Cardiff, the labour
Health
joining us from Cardiff, the Labour
Health Minister, previously the
youngest ever President of the Welsh
TUC, Vaughan Gething, Liz
Seville—Roberts elected as an MP in
Seville-Roberts eluted as an MP in
2015 and
Seville—Roberts elected as an MP in
2015 and currently the leader of
Plaid Cymm
Plaid Cymru in the House of Commons,
Plaid Cymm in the House of Commons,
Rocco Forte, a
Plaid Cymru in the House of Commons,
Rocco Forte, a hotelier with the
business in his blood, he worked
with his father at the start of his
career and in 1996 started his own
EWUP
group of luxury hotels. And prolific
author and professor of creative
writing at Brunel University and
writing at anel University and
joint winner
writing at Brunel University and
joint winner of the Booker prize
last year for
last yearfor her
joint winner of the Booker prize
last year for her novel Bernardine
Evaristo. Good evening and welcome
to my guest here in the studio and
Vaughan Gething joining us down the
line and to our audience, virtual
audience, thank you for being here,
you’re joining
you’rejoining us from Cardiff
audience, thank you for being here,
you’re joining us from Cardiff and
the Cardiff area. Lovely to have you
with us. If you want to join
with us. If you want tojoin in
the Cardiff area. Lovely to have you
with us. If you want to join in the
with us. If you want tojoin in the
conversation,
with us. If you want to join in the
conversation, you can contact the
programme at BBC Question Time on
social media and be part of the
conversation. Let us start with our
first question tonight from our
virtual audience, Tessa Marshall.
will you
Will you commit to educating the
will you commit to educating the
British
Will you commit to educating the
British public about the atrocities
of the British Empire, take down the
statues of slave traders in the UK
stames of slave traders in the UK
and will you
statues of slave traders in the UK
and will you apologise for paying
off of the owners of slaves and
accept -- a
accept —— a doubt that the British
accept -- a doubt that the British
peopla
people were
accept —— a doubt that the British
people were paying off as late as
2015. I think we have got to
confront our history warts and all
and while there are many things we
ran be proud
can be proud about with regards to
ran be proud about with regards to
Britain
can be proud about with regards to
Britain and its history, there is a
lot that we need to confront and be
honest about that is bad about our
history. I
history. Ithink
honest about that is bad about our
history. I think that applying the
standards today to what may have
happened many hundreds of years ago
is a difficult concept to say the
least. And I think rather than using
the language of blame and apology,
we should be
we should he being honest about it,
we should be being honest about it,
being
we should he being honest about it,
being forthright about it, using
democratic processes, wherever
possible, to deal with it. Let us
take for example, particular statues
take for example, particular status
to
take for example, particular stames
to slave
take for example, particular statues
to slave traders in Bristol or
elsewhere, use the democratic
process, through a proper decision
decide what to do with that
particular memorial or statue. Do
you think they were wrong to tear it
down? I think they were. Whilst I
down? I think they were. whilst I
absolutely
down? I think they were. Whilst I
absolutely get and understand the
huge strength of feeling that has
been engendered as a result of that
appalling incident in Minneapolis
and the fact that many people have
and the fact that many peopla have
just had
and the fact that many people have
just had enough and I get that
utterty, I
utterty, Ido
just had enough and I get that
utterly, I do think that we all
utterty, I do think that we all
await to
utterly, I do think that we all
await to each other to respect the
mle of
rule of law and work for greater
mle of law and work for greater
equality. I
rule of law and work for greater
equality. I think the scenes that we
saw in Bristol were disturbing in
the sense that they did not seem to
be that sense of order. Your
be that sense of order. YourJustice
be that sense of order. Your justice
Secretary, do
be that sense of order. YourJustice
Secretary, do you want to see those
peopla
people prosecuted? An investigation
peopla prosecuted? An investigation
is ongoing,
people prosecuted? An investigation
is ongoing, we have to let the
police do their
police do theirjob independently
and let the prosecuting authorities
follow the evidence wherever it
leads. The point I am making is if
we stand for something together,
collectively, in this great country,
collactively, in this great country,
it has got to
collectively, in this great country,
it has got to be the rule of law and
it has got to be the ml; of law and
those
it has got to be the rule of law and
those values of freedom that
attracted so many people here in the
first place and make this country,
whilst it is imperfect and there is
a huge amount for us to do, a good
place to live, because we have that
underpinning of the rule of law and
underpinning of the mle of law and
democracy.
underpinning of the rule of law and
democracy. Let us celebrate that but
also confront the past as well.
Tessa, when you said you want the
government to apologise for
reparations paid to countries until
2015 for slavery, what are you
referring to? The debt that we were
paying off refers to the £20 million
that was paid off to slave owners
when slavery became a legal in 1837
and that debt is something that the
British Government was paying off as
late as 2015. Robert? I think the
history of our islands is always
with us. Where are we paying that
with us. where are we paying that
debt off
with us. Where are we paying that
debt off until 2015? I think she is
right, I have read reports similarly
right, I have read reports similarty
about
right, I have read reports similarly
about that. She makes a very
powerful point about the fact that
you cannot escape history and I
think it would be fundamentally
dishonest of us through removing
stames
statues and airbrushing out history
status and airbrushing out history
to then
statues and airbrushing out history
to then pretend that all was well.
Totalitarian regimes do that and
Communist regimes and other extreme
regimes do that sort of thing and
then pretend that all is well. No,
we need to be honest, face up to it
and accept the fact that we are as
much prisoners of our history as
anything else, but we have a chance,
through democracy, to break
through democracy, to breakfree
anything else, but we have a chance,
through democracy, to break free and
progress.
progress. Bernardine. I
progress. Bernardine. Idisagree, I
relish that statue being toppled in
Bristol. They had tried for decades
to either get the statue removed or
get a park put on the statute to
provide the context for Edward
Colson’s history as a slave trader
and I think everybody now knows that
he was culpable in terms of some
80,000 Africans been enslaved in the
New World and 20,000 of those
Africans were also lost at sea. He
was a really toxic symbol in Bristol
and it was really important that he
should go, or at least be
contextualised and people tried to
contextualised and peopla tried to
do that
contextualised and people tried to
do that and I tried for decades and
they did not get anywhere with it.
It felt to me that it was totally
right that they should topple that
statue, because of what he
represented and I am totally for a
lot of the other statues in this
country being removed and perhaps
re—contextualised in museums or
somewhere where we actually
understand what role they played in
society in a wider sense. The whole
idea. what
idea. What statues for example?
idea. what stames for example?
There
idea. What statues for example?
There was somebody removed from
outside the Museum of London for
example. Robert Milligan. There is
also an argument about Lord Nelson,
who are such a totemic figure. Would
you want to see his statue come
down? I think we need to have that
conversation, probably. There is
also this argument that has come up
in terms of the statues, that we
cannot change history and that it is
the
rannot change history and that it is
the history of
cannot change history and that it is
the history of this country, but
actually history is a construction.
Events happen, we have a past, and
then historians contextualised that
past and interrogated and what has
happened in this country is
historically that has been done by a
late white men who have been the
historians who have set the
framework for the events of the
past. History is something that
needs to be challenged and
re—interrogated and revised
constantly. Removing the statues is
constantly. Removing the status is
in a
constantly. Removing the statues is
in a sense, it is giving power to
the people who really do object to a
the peopla who really do object to a
symbol of
the people who really do object to a
symbol of their historical slavery
and all their allies as well. The
other thing about history is that
history has always excluded,
primarily women, and people of
primarily women, and peopla of
colour
primarily women, and people of
colour and working class people and
colour and working class peopla and
LGBT cue plus
colour and working class people and
LGBT cue plus people in the ways it
LGBT cue plus peopla in the ways it
has
LGBT cue plus people in the ways it
has been told and that also goes to
what you were saying about the
colonial history. A lot of people in
colonial history. A lot of peopla in
this country do
colonial history. A lot of people in
this country do not understand the
colonial history or the understand
it through a certain prism, where
they feel that Britain went and
travelled all over the world in
order to help people. There is still
a section of society who do not
think slavery was a really bad
thing. I think it is really
thing. Ithink it is really
important
thing. I think it is really
important that we interrogate
history and when you have to take
the law into your own hands and
remove the statue, nobody died, it
is just a little tin statue that was
thrown into a river, and that then
led to this conversation we are
lad to this conversation we are
having now,
led to this conversation we are
having now, about the rest of the
relic of
relics of Britain’s murky past and I
relic of Britain’s murky past and I
think it is
relics of Britain’s murky past and I
think it is really important. When
think it is really important. when
Tessa
think it is really important. When
Tessa talks about removing statues
Tessa talks about removing status
of
Tessa talks about removing statues
of anyone who has profited from
Empire, I
Empire, lam
of anyone who has profited from
Empire, I am wondering, where does
that go? The visual symbols, the
statues are really toxic and they
stames are really toxic and they
really are an
statues are really toxic and they
really are an affront to our shared
humanity and I think at least we
need to look at that and, you know,
Britain was built on the wealth of
slavery and colonialism, that is the
truth. And we don’t really admit
that. Rocco. There is a quote from
Nelson Mandela that says hiding our
history is not the route to
enlightenment, we have to understand
our history and we have to confront
it. And I agree very much with what
Robert Buckland was saying, that we
rannot
cannot judge
Robert Buckland was saying, that we
cannotjudge the past by the values
cannot judge the past by the values
of today. It
cannotjudge the past by the values
of today. It seems that people are
of today. It seems that peopla are
trying to
of today. It seems that people are
trying to use the evil of slavery to
rewrite the history of this country.
And try and negate the heritage that
this country has. Do you think it
was wrong to take down the statue of
Edward Colson? I think it was wrong
to take it down in that way and any
vandalism of any kind is completely
unacceptable. It is against the law
and it is disgraceful that the
police, were not there in sufficient
numbers to prevent that happening.
People have made comparison. The
worst aspect for me of the London
demonstration, seeing police running
demonstration, seeing police mnning
away from
demonstration, seeing police running
away from demonstrators, in fear,
that is a breakdown of law and order
and it is mob rule and it is
and it is mob ml; and it is
completely
and it is mob rule and it is
completely unacceptable. When you
completely unacceptable. when you
talk
completely unacceptable. When you
talk about vandalism, one example
is, and I am not equating them, but
is, and lam not equating them, but
the Bertin
is, and I am not equating them, but
the Berlin Wall
the Berlin Well for example, where
the Bertin Wall for example, where
people just
the Berlin Well for example, where
people just pulled it down
themselves and the police to buy and
let it happen. I’m not trying to say
they are the same, but
nonetheless, . ..
nonetheless,... No, but
they are the same, but
nonetheless, . .. No, but the
nonetheless,... No, but the argument
nonetheless”. No, but the argument
that is made
nonetheless,... No, but the argument
that is made is that it was
something that people took upon
themselves to do. There have been
stames
statues of
themselves to do. There have been
stames of long
statues of long forgotten people at
status of long forgotten peoplo at
a time
statues of long forgotten people at
a time when the country is
Sleepwalking to economic
sleepwalking to economic disaster
slaemlking to economic disaster
and our
Sleepwalking to economic disaster
and our children are being prevented
from going to school. We will deal
with one thing at a time. It is
mind—boggling. Let us talk to some
mind-boggling. Let us talk to some
of our
mind—boggling. Let us talk to some
of our virtual audience. I think it
is important that as a society we
look at the past, we don’t need to
glorify or celebrate the events of
the past that we as a nation took
part in. I agree that statues that
have links to the past, where there
are issues related to slavery, do
need to be taken down. I’m not
asking for them to be had, I think
they need to be in a museum, because
they are great places to educate and
help remember the past. Maybe even
have history
have history about colonialism and
ethnic minority communities in the
curriculum and I think that would be
an important step for us as a
society. I agree completely with
what was said about the fact, I went
to university in Bristol and four
years it has been a topic of
discussion to take it down and the
voices are democratic, people have
been asking to take it down and they
have been ignored. Who are they
have been ignored. who are they
trying to
have been ignored. Who are they
trying to protect? They were trying
to protect the name and you say it
was disturbing that it was taken
down, if you think about the people
down, if you think about the peopla
it has
down, if you think about the people
it has affected and the ancestors of
people passing it every day, to see
someone glorify when they have
killed thousands of people and are
killed thousands of peopla and are
being
killed thousands of people and are
being celebrated in a way so
being celabrated in a way so
publicly. I
being celebrated in a way so
publicly. I don’t agree with what
Rocco or the Justice
Rocco or theJustice Secretary
publicly. I don’t agree with what
Rocco or the Justice Secretary said
Rocco or the justice Secretary said
there.
Rocco or the Justice Secretary said
there. There are still people just
that may are
that mag are trying to justify what
that may are trying to justify what
that
that mag are trying to justify what
that man did. Elaine. I like the
second part of the question because
there will be equal measures on both
sides and I am really interested in
how we will all come together and
have a critical conversation about
how we can
how we ran go
have a critical conversation about
how we can go forward with this
how we ran go forward with this
issue.
how we can go forward with this
issue. Let me come to
issue. Let me come toJohn Williams
issue. Let me come to john Williams
on that. john, you
issue. Let me come toJohn Williams
on that. John, you wanted to take
on that. john, you wanted to take
this question
on that. John, you wanted to take
this question forward.
Will the possible taking down of 60
statues in the UK advance the cause
of Black Lives Matter?
Vaughan, this leads on from Tessa’s
question, whether or not taking the
status
statues down is productive, whether
stames down is productive, whether
you approved
statues down is productive, whether
you approved of what happened in
Bristol. Is it perhaps obscuring a
larger or helping a larger
discussion? I am
discussion? lam pleased
larger or helping a larger
discussion? I am pleased that
discussion? I am pleased thatJohn
discussion? lam pleased that john
has
discussion? I am pleased thatJohn
has made his point. I do think some
of the statues need to come down and
of the stames need to come down and
others
of the statues need to come down and
others that stay up need greater
context, about who those figures
were. But the Black Lives Matter is
were. But the Black Lives Mather is
not a campaign
were. But the Black Lives Matter is
not a campaign to re—engineer our
not a campaign to re-engineer our
pub“:
public space
not a campaign to re—engineer our
public space and remove statues. It
is not even about the death of
George Floyd, it is about the
persistent and continuing racial
inequality and in America and other
countries around the world and in
our own. That is the point. Within
our own. That is the point. within
that, this is only
our own. That is the point. Within
that, this is only one small part
about the debate we have to have,
and also about the action we need to
take. All of us are painfully
familiar with the fact that the
criminal
criminaljustice act is different,
criminal justice act is different,
if you look at
criminaljustice act is different,
if you look at people like me or
if you look at peopla like me or
Robert, and
if you look at people like me or
Robert, and they are different and
that is the action that we need to
be taken, and not get led down a
be taken, and not get lad down a
blind alley. It
be taken, and not get led down a
blind alley. It is not examining our
distant past and rewriting our
history, it is understanding our
past to help build our
past to help build ourfuture. The
past to help build our future. The
“Y
past to help build ourfuture. The
way politicians talk about this
matter is. I think the Prime
Minister would be in a better
position to do his job
position to do hisjob if he
recognised at the start of the
21st—century talking about
watermelon
2lst—century talking about
watermelon smiles
21st—century talking about
watermelon smiles was not helpful.
We ran
We can all learn from this and take
We ran all learn from this and take
the
We can all learn from this and take
the opportunity of this
extraordinary movement to accept the
view of our past, but it is much
more important to make changes to
our shared future. Liz, you will
want to respond. Looking at
want to respond. Looking atJohn and
want to respond. Looking at john and
Tessa’s
want to respond. Looking atJohn and
Tessa’s question, it is two size of
the same coin. Should we be taking
stames
statues down and removing portraits
commemorating people who profited
commemorating peopla who profited
from
commemorating people who profited
from slavery or the Empire? Or is
that counter—productive in terms of
that counter-productive in terms of
looking at the
that counter—productive in terms of
looking at the bigger issue?
Certainly this is a time where I
look back to the time when I was
raised in Eltham and the appalling
murder of Stephen Lawrence. At that
time it drove many establishment
changes, but it did not drive
enough, we know that. We know that
we live in a racist society. There
is one thing I could refer back to,
about what Vaughan said. This is
disappointing. Frankly, I
disappointing. Frankly, Ithink
about what Vaughan said. This is
disappointing. Frankly, I think we
disappointing. Frankly, Ithinkwe
are trying to
disappointing. Frankly, I think we
are trying to fight from the same
corner. You do know that Plaid Cymru
corner. You do know that Plaid Cymm
and Adam
corner. You do know that Plaid Cymru
and Adam Price has called for an
and Adam Price has rallad for an
enquiry into
and Adam Price has called for an
enquiry into structural racism in
enquiry into stmctural racism in
Walas in
enquiry into structural racism in
Wales in response to his questioning
that the First Minister of Wales
responded to, supported the concept
of a black and minority ethnic
museum in Wales and it has been
Plaid Cymm
Plaid Cymru who has been leading on
Plaid Cymm who has been leading on
the major point,
Plaid Cymru who has been leading on
the major point, which is changes to
the curriculum. Vaughan is referring
to oils compared to a colonial
outpost. One of the petty things we
do in politis
do in politics in the United Kingdom
do in politic in the United Kingdom
is bring it down
do in politics in the United Kingdom
is bring it down to personalities.
These are big, serious questions.
Looking at the statues, and I raised
Looking at the statics, and I raised
this
Looking at the statues, and I raised
this yesterday with the Prime
Minister, what we have within the
United Kingdom is a way of
presenting history very much through
the eyes of the Conservatives. The
Prime Minister, when I asked him on
this question, is that conservatives
do not pull down statues. It was the
imagery of the past and yet, and I
know the Lord Chancellor will agree
with this, we have much better
legislation in place to deal with
lagislation in place to deal with
racial
legislation in place to deal with
racial hatred, but we still live
within a racist society which acts
on racism. The question I have is,
how are we going to bring about the
big, social changes? The big changes
in attitudes? That is why the
statues are so interesting because
they are so symbolic of a certain
sort of history that said the Empire
was fine, the British Empire was a
force for good in the world. This is
not two.
not true. Now is the time to come to
not tme. Now is the time to come to
recognise it is not
not true. Now is the time to come to
recognise it is notjust the history
recognise it is not just the history
of powerful,
recognise it is notjust the history
of powerful, white men who often
made their money and their fortunes
out of the sufferings of others. Now
is the time for the voice of the
others to come through and that is
my hope for the future. We are
having this discussion here, but it
has to go beyond the usual talking
heads or politicians and get into
our curriculum and really change
people’s attitudes. Slavery has bred
racism. As a person in a responsible
position I cannot even bring myself
to
position I rannot even bring myself
to repeat
position I cannot even bring myself
to repeat what some politicians,
including our Prime minister, has
said in the past about ethnic
minorities. I have been reading
history at AS—level and revising
history at AS-level and revising
with my son.
history at AS—level and revising
with my son. The curriculum needs to
change. The War of independence is
depicted as the Indian mutiny. That
needs to change. Especially for
children who are born and bred over
here. My son considers himself as
Welsh. And for him to read history
in a different manner than what I
have read, and what I have read
recently, I think it is important
that violence should be condemned,
that violance should be condemned,
but
that violence should be condemned,
but racism from top down needs to be
dealt with. I am very proud to live
in Cardiff and to have worked in
Cardiff for the last 25 years. It is
a multicultural society, but we need
to make sure from the top down, from
Doris
Boris downwards, we need to deal
with this racism. Robert, you heard
the Prime Minister talk about this
yesterday, at Prime Minister’s
Questions, the comment he made about
taken in wave it at the Queen and
watermelon smiles, has come back to
haunt him. What will we see from the
haunt him. what will we see from the
government if
haunt him. What will we see from the
government if anything? The Prime
Minister who was mayor or probably
the most cosmopolitan city in the
world and who was elected twice and
world and who was eluted twice and
whose
world and who was elected twice and
whose approach to issues of
migration and multiculturalism has
been open, liberal and inclusive.
And his remarks in the aftermath of
the unlawful killing of George Floyd
I think were appropriate. They
stmck
struck the right tone and he talked
stmck the right tone and he talked
in a positive
struck the right tone and he talked
in a positive way about what needed
to be done. I think absolutely we
have the right approach. I think
that sense of trying to bring people
together is what we need now. I
think a lot of the remarks are on
the money when it comes to the fact
that rather than focusing upon icons
and statues, actions speak far
louder than words. Vaughan has made
the point about the criminal justice
system and I have responsibility for
that in England and Wales and I take
that in England and Walas and I take
responsibility
that in England and Wales and I take
responsibility for the need to
improve the way in which we deal
with black and minority ethnic
peopla in
people in that system. There are a
whole range of things that we are
whola range of things that we are
doing. No
whole range of things that we are
doing. No time to go into them now,
but the practical measures we have
got to do to make their experience
different. The black population in
Walas
Wales is overrepresented by five
times within the prison population
of Wales. Surely that is a desperate
failure? That is an indication of
the racism in our side society in
action. Would you commit to using
that as a target, to reduce that an
acceptable percentage within the
prison population? Specifically in
Wales? Of course it applies
throughout England and Wales. I
throughout England and Walas. I
would
throughout England and Wales. I
would commit to making sure that the
problams that
problems that are inherited by the
criminal
criminaljustice
problems that are inherited by the
criminal justice system
criminaljustice system are dealt
criminal justice system are dealt
with
criminaljustice system are dealt
with further up the line and the
diversions that I needed in order to
help people of that background not
help peopla of that background not
to get into
help people of that background not
to get into the system in the first
place I what we are going to have to
do. That is not
do. That is notjust me, that is
do. That is not just me, that is
education,
do. That is notjust me, that is
education, health, housing, the
whole apparatus of government in
whola apparatus of government in
Walas
whole apparatus of government in
Wales and Westminster coming
together around the problem of the
individual, rather
individual, ratherthan
together around the problem of the
individual, rather than this silo
approach where I end up responsible
for assisting with a
disproportionate number of young
peopla from
people from that background. This is
peopla from that background. This is
a mass
people from that background. This is
a mass refusal to engage in the
reality that the Prime Minister has
been deeply offensive at the start
of the 21st century, it is a real
issue. For people like me it
issue. For peopla like me it
matters, just
issue. For people like me it
matters, just as someone comparing
the experience of Wales to colour
people in the American experience.
It matters and it is offensive. If
we want to
we we nt to move
It matters and it is offensive. If
we want to move on, we have got to
we wantto move on, we have goth
accept it is not
we want to move on, we have got to
accept it is not acceptable and you
get credit for yourself and the
party- If you
party. If you could only acknowledge
what is staring you in the face. It
does not matter that I am a
politician, I am this colour every
singla day of
single day of the year and it
matters to me that we are spoken
about in a way that reflects who we
about in a way that reﬂacts who we
are and
about in a way that reflects who we
are and not the colour of our skin
and make sure you are not making
these mealy—mouthed apologies for
these meaty-mouthed apologies for
things
these mealy-mouthed apologies for
things that
these mealy—mouthed apologies for
things that are clearly wrong. I
things that are dearty wrong. I
found
things that are clearly wrong. I
found Boris offensive all along with
his journalism
hisjournalism in
found Boris offensive all along with
his journalism in the Spectator,
with the racist things he said. When
with the racist things he said. when
he
with the racist things he said. When
he became Mayor of London he became
mayor of an incredibly multicultural
city, but one of the first things to
try to do was get rid of Black
History Month. We are talking about
the importance of history and
acknowledging the past and also we
acknowladging the past and also we
should
acknowledging the past and also we
should be celebrating the entire
population, people of colour and our
contribution to this society, we
have been here since the Romans, it
is something I have written about.
We have a mayor who tries to get rid
of the single thing that we do to
of the singla thing that we do to
bring to
of the single thing that we do to
bring to the wider public the fact
that we have a history. The truth is
black history is a British history,
this is a multicultural country and
it always has been. British history
is world history because we had an
empire that ruled over a quarter of
empire that mled over a quarter of
the world
empire that ruled over a quarter of
the world for a very long time. I
really do not accept you apologising
or trying to present Boris
or trying to present BorisJohnson
or trying to present Boris johnson
in a good
or trying to present BorisJohnson
in a good light because I found him
in a good light because Ifound him
deeply
in a good light because I found him
deeply offensive. Robert, do you
want to respond to that? I am moving
on in a moment. This is the Prime
Minister after all, the leader of
your
Minister afber all, the leader of
your party.
Minister after all, the leader of
your party. I would say
your party. I would sayjournalists
your party. I would say journalists
write
your party. I would sayjournalists
write lots of things and lots of
polemic that they would later come
to regret and not choose to do now.
I would say this... Has the Prime
Minister ever said that he regretted
using those terms? I cannot speak
using those terms? I rannot speak
about
using those terms? I cannot speak
about what might have been written
15 or so years ago. I have to judge
him on his actions as a politician.
I see somebody who understands the
challenges we face, accept them and
faces up to them and wants to do
something about them. All right.
This is a subject we could talk
about for the entire programme.
There are a lot of other questions,
so I will move on now to Rosenna
so I will move on now to Rosanna
Alim.
so I will move on now to Rosenna
Alim. Good evening. Like myself and
many other independent restaurants,
our restaurant is very much a family
-based and
—based and five of our family
members are dependent on that
business. Since Covid—19 has come
business. Since Covid-19 has come
around, social
business. Since Covid—19 has come
around, social distancing seems to
be inevitable in hospitality. Once
lockdown is lifted we will have 25
to SON:
to 50% of our capacity and we feel
to 5096 of our capacity and we feel
that only
to 50% of our capacity and we feel
that only fixed costs may be
covered, or may not be covered. In
the short—term and long—term what
the short-term and long-term what
strategies will
the short—term and long—term what
strategies will the government and
stakeholder organisations put
forward for our industry? Taken into
account so much debt has been
created for independent business
family firms? You mention social
distancing and two metres in this
country is the acceptable distance.
Rocco, I want to come to your first
with your hotel business. Yes, this
two metres social distancing rule
two metres social distancing mic
has
two metres social distancing rule
has come out of the blue and there
is no scientific evidence behind it.
The WTO has come out and said if you
are two metres away, you have 1% of
are two metres away, you have 196 of
catching the
are two metres away, you have 1% of
catching the disease will stop if
you are one metre away, you have a
Sin
396 chance
you are one metre away, you have a
3% chance of catching the disease.
396 chance of catching the disease.
This is
3% chance of catching the disease.
This is the WHO. Yes. The reality in
continental Europe which has started
to open up, is they have gone back
to one metre. Some of them, not all
of them. We have got China? Germany
has. Germany is at 1.5 metres, as is
Italy, France and Denmark are at one
metre. The reality of this whole
thing is no one is concentrating on
the economic impact of this. The
reality of this disease which at
first was thought to be a terrible
disease and was going to kill
millions of people, it has not
millions of peopla, it has not
turned
millions of people, it has not
turned out to be like that.
turned out to be like that. A lot of
surveys have shown it is 0.1 to 0.2%
surveys have shown it is 0.1 to 0.296
of peopla who
surveys have shown it is 0.1 to 0.2%
of people who die if they catch the
disease. Other suggestions are it is
disease. other suggestions are it is
196 and in
disease. Other suggestions are it is
1% and in some countries it is
196 and in some countries it is
higher. The
1% and in some countries it is
higher. The only thorough research
that has been done has been done by
Stanford or New York, one of the
hotbeds in the United States, and it
has come out with these figures. The
reality of this disease is the
average age of people who have died
in this country is 80 and one third
of them have died in care homes. It
of them have died in rare homes. It
is a disgrace what
of them have died in care homes. It
is a disgrace what has happened in
the rare
the care homes. But when it comes to
the rare homes. But when it comes to
the hospitality
the care homes. But when it comes to
the hospitality industry, for
example, and Rosenna is talking
example, and Rosanna is talking
about
example, and Rosenna is talking
about her restaurant, if this
government sticks to two metres
social distancing, will it be viable
social distancing, will it be viabla
for you? You
social distancing, will it be viable
for you? You have got hotels around
the world. No. A lot of hotels in
this country depend on international
travel and if there is no
international travel, they will not
have customers and they will not be
able to open. You are opposing the
quarantine as well? Yes, of course.
Again, there is no scientific
evidence behind it. The chief
scientific officer says it is a
political decision and not a
scientific decision. We are closing
down when the rest of Europe is
opening up. Until Sunday you could
come from Iran and Brazil, the two
biggest hotbeds of the disease, with
impunity. All of a sudden, no one
ran come
can come here.
With your hotels in other countries,
with your hotels in other countries,
ran you open
With your hotels in other countries,
can you open economically profitably
ran you open economically profitably
but that
can you open economically profitably
but that kind of social distancing?
It is still difficult but a metre
makes it possible. The tourism
industry has suffered
disproportionately, effectively it
has been without income since March
and it will continue to be without
income in this country until
income in this country untilJuly
income in this country until july
and that
income in this country untilJuly
and that is four months, one third
of the year. Many businesses in the
tourism industry will go under. You
impose quarantine which stops
foreigners entering the country,
just when there is a chance to save
something out of the summer season,
it is another nail in the coffin,
the two metre rule makes it
the two metre mle makes it
impossible
the two metre rule makes it
impossible for people to open
property.
properly. Fun, when it comes to
property. Fun, when it comes to
Walas,
Wales, the
properly. Fun, when it comes to
Wales, the First Minister says he
does not expect Welsh tourism to be
mnning this
running this summer, so what do you
mnning this summer, so what do you
think in
running this summer, so what do you
think in terms of what Rosina has
said and what Rocco has said? I am
proud of the fact that our priority
is to keep Wales say. We have taken
a deliberately cautious approach of
easing out of lockdown because I
disagree with Rocco and his
characterisation of Covid—19 and the
characterisation of Covid-19 and the
impact, it is a
characterisation of Covid—19 and the
impact, it is a dreadful disease, it
has taken tens of thousands of lives
across the UK and it would have
taken more if we had not imposed
lockdown when we did. I don’t think
you ran try to
you can try to balance of health
you ran try to balance of health
against the
you can try to balance of health
against the economy, if we come out
of lockdown too quickly, we will see
a much greater impact upon our
economy. We are looking at a range
of measures that we take, will
signal more economic activity taking
place, but on the basis that we have
to do it in the safest way possible
to do it in the safest way possibla
and that
to do it in the safest way possible
and that does mean caution. How can
and that does mean caution. How ran
you help
and that does mean caution. How can
you help Rosenna? We have a two
metre rule in our regulations and we
metre mle in our regulations and we
have to
metre rule in our regulations and we
have to consider that we are not
about to change the law on that
because I think there is good
evidence that you are safer, you
have double the risk having a one
metre rule as opposed to a two metre
metre mle as opposed to a two metre
mle and
metre rule as opposed to a two metre
rule and the scientific group
advised on that and I am not about
to write --
to write —— risk the lives of our
to write -- risk the lives of our
citizens. The
to write —— risk the lives of our
citizens. The conclusion of that is
that Rosenna’s business might go to
the wall. Let us hear from you
again. I’m not saying about reducing
the social distancing, if that is
the law, it is the law, but even if
you reduced it to one metre, I don’t
think that would make a lot of
difference, because I think in the
mind of the consumer, it is very
much scorched in about the two metre
mle, about
rule, about staying away from other
mle, about staying away from other
peopla. Even if
rule, about staying away from other
people. Even if you reduced it to
half a metre, I think people are
half a metre, I think peopla are
going to stay
half a metre, I think people are
going to stay away. The dilemma is
going to stay away. The dilamma is
not just in the
going to stay away. The dilemma is
notjust in the next week at
not just in the next week at the
next two weeks of the next month,
this is a longer term problem that
hospitality are going to have. Lisa
Marie. In Wales more than 95% of our
businesses are small and micro
businesses and at the moment there
are a zero emissions going into one,
so there is no evidence really to
suggest keeping the lockdown in
place, but also how are they going
to take into account the impact this
is going to have an all these small
businesses and our economy in Wales,
which could be severely affected if
we keep some of these guidelines in
place? I
place? Ijust want
we keep some of these guidelines in
place? I just want to jazz,
place? Ijust want to jazz, once
place? Ijust want tojau, once
furlough has
place? Ijust want to jazz, once
furlough has ended, she we prepare
for mass redundancies? The economy
in Wales has always been a house of
cards, we are very dependent on the
pub“:
public sector and we should have
been leading the way in reopening,
but we are not, we are days and
weeks behind what Westminster is
doing and really, the Welsh Assembly
sits on its hands for three weeks,
in between throwing out a few little
tidbits of very minor or trivial
relaxing. Looking at the situation
in England, Alok Sharma said that
three and a half million jobs at
risk hospitality sector and the
government is coming under pressure
from Conservative MPs to do more for
businesses like Rosenna’s and reduce
to one metre. Rosenna makes an
important point about the confidence
people will have and governments
peopla will have and governments
will
people will have and governments
will have regulations and have plans
and guidance, but without that
confidence, then other things will
happen and I think she is right to
remind us that this isn’t going to
be something that we will have an
end date do and all will be well, we
have extended things like the
furlough scheme into October and in
Wales about A18,000 people have been
Wales about 418,000 people have been
supported
Wales about A18,000 people have been
supported through various government
schemes, which is welcome, but this
isn’t a problem for weeks or months,
this is a problem that will endure
for a much longer period. I think
within government we are right to
have the debate on the debate is
happening across the country,
because there are different
international standards, but I think
it is right that we stick to two
metres, we have to be clear on that
and clarity is something that people
demand from government and whilst it
is right of us to consider the
evidence and constantly evaluate and
question and make adjustments, the
two metre rule certainly stays for
two metre mle certainly stays for
the
two metre rule certainly stays for
the foreseeable and with regard...
the foreseeabla and with regard...
It is confusing
the foreseeable and with regard...
It is confusing given that other
countries are going for a metre and
the WHO is suggesting a metre and
others are saying one and a half and
it is all one science, so how is
that decision made? It is a question
of two stages, the evidence and
advice you get from Sage when the
scientists forms part of the
decision—making that is ultimately
decision-making that is ultimately
political, the
decision—making that is ultimately
political, the 2—stage approach and
political, the 2-stage approach and
there
political, the 2—stage approach and
there will be a number of different
factors. The challenge for
government now is that we come out
of this really intense lockdown is
how to get the combination right and
that is why there has been a big
debate about the quarantine, clearly
debate about the quarantine, dearty
at the
debate about the quarantine, clearly
at the time of the height of the
outbreak, quarantine would have made
no difference but the advice now is
that even small adjustments can
that even small adjustments ran
affect
that even small adjustments can
affect that R number and it is a
constant evaluation to see what
adjustments we can make to help
adjustments we ran make to help
people in the
adjustments we can make to help
people in the same position as
Rosenna and to get the balance right
between the need to open up and the
need to save lives as well.
Bernardine. I don’t know what the
solution is, if the hospitality
industry really does open up, as you
would like, Rocco, how do you keep
people safe? You cannot open up with
peopla safe? You cannot open up with
social
people safe? You cannot open up with
social distancing, so how do you
keep peopla
keep people safe? It is up to the
consumer to decide what he wants to
do. People have been terrified by
the government propaganda, and in a
“Y
way that is gradually breaking down
already and you see it with people
already and you see it with peopla
on the
already and you see it with people
on the beaches and people in the
parks, they are not social
distancing into metres. The only
place I have seen it happening is
here. We are doing it very well. It
is not just
is notjust propaganda. It is about
is not just propaganda. It is about
the
is notjust propaganda. It is about
the livelihoods of millions of
peopla,
people, we are not talking about
peopla, we are not talking about
thousands,
people, we are not talking about
thousands, we are talking about
millions of people who are going to
millions of peopla who are going to
lose
millions of people who are going to
lose their
millions of peopla who are going to
lose theirjobs
millions of people who are going to
lose theirjobs and their families
and it will affect their health and
everything else. You cannot
everything else. You cannotjust
everything else. You cannot just
say, sweep it
everything else. You cannotjust
say, sweep it aside or it is just
the economy. What about the resorts
the economy. what about the resorts
in Wales
the economy. What about the resorts
in Wales which depend entirely on a
summer season? Those people are not
going to be able to function. They
are not going to survive. They have
had one winter, and they’re going
had one winter, and therre going
into
had one winter, and they’re going
into another winter and summer which
should have lifted them up is not
going to be there if you carry on
like this. All those businesses are
going to be devastated, with all the
jobs that go with them. It is not
just propaganda, I think people are
confused
just propaganda, I think peopla are
confused by
just propaganda, I think people are
confused by the different
information coming out. You have
talked about this report from
Stanford, no .1, 0.2%. That was not
Stanford, no .1, 0.296. That was not
peer reviewed
Stanford, no .1, 0.2%. That was not
peer reviewed another scientists
have come out with different figures
in of statistics. There was a report
in of statistic. There was a report
leaked by
in of statistics. There was a report
leaked by experts in the German
government which says the chairman
that reaction was completely
over—the—top, it was unnecessary,
over-the-top, it was unnecessary,
they compared
over—the—top, it was unnecessary,
they compared it
they compared it to the the 1918
influenza epidemic which killed
inﬂuenza epidemic which killed
25,000
influenza epidemic which killed
25,000 people in Germany on 28,000
25,000 peopla in Germany on 28,000
in this country
25,000 people in Germany on 28,000
in this country and the economy of
the world was not lockdown. In 1968
when I was 23, we had the Hong Kong
ﬂu which
flu which killed over
when I was 23, we had the Hong Kong
flu which killed overl
flu which killed overi million
ﬂu which killed overl million
peopla
flu which killed overi million
people worldwide, 80,000 in this
peopla worldwide, 80,000 in this
country, I
people worldwide, 80,000 in this
country, I don’t remember anything
about it, it was not talked about.
And we still have excess deaths and
we are the highest country in Europe
for deaths. One of the things that
the public knows and people can make
the public knows and people ran make
their own
the public knows and people can make
their own responses and I think this
is the reason why people are still
keeping to two metres, Professor
Niall Ferguson said it, we went into
lockdown too late and we went into
lockdown too late because Boris
johnson
Johnson likes to think that he will
johnson likes to think that he will
let peopla
Johnson likes to think that he will
let people do what they want to do
let peopla do what they want to do
and he is
let people do what they want to do
and he is reluctant to take
criticisms on this. Here in Wales I
criticisms on this. Here in Walas I
deeply fear
criticisms on this. Here in Wales I
deeply fear when the furlough scheme
is starting to scale down, it starts
to scale down in August when
businesses are responsible for
taking on their National Insurance
and pensions, we have 74% of our
and pensions, we have 7496 of our
businesses,
and pensions, we have 74% of our
businesses, who are using the
furlough scheme. And of course I
represent an area which is deeply
dependent on the tourism industry. I
fear what is going to happen with
that industry and I talk to people,
that industry and I talk to peopla,
a railway, a
that industry and I talk to people,
a railway, a jewel in the crown of
the heritage railways and they are
facing what they called the three
winter scenario and when the
furlough scheme ceases, regardless
of what the Welsh Government says
because they have not got the means
of funding their own policies, they
are going to be facing a situation
and many other businesses, where
they will be making redundancies
this summer. This is the three
winter scenario and to come back to
the question of public confidence,
because it will be public confidence
that changes this, we need an
effective Test and Trace system in
place, that is seen by people to
work, both in Wales and in England
work, both in Walas and in England
and until
work, both in Wales and in England
and until people have that
confidence, then we are going to see
the same problem coming up.
Alongside this, I beg at both our
governments, the Welsh Government
and the UK Government, the English
government in this respect, look at
what is happening to our tourism and
hospitality industry and look at our
dependence on this, these people
will go out of business and there
will be immense suffering in terms
of unemployment, please do not pull
the wool over our eyes, we need
these industries into the future and
I fear what will happen in the
summer. You mention testing and we
have a question on that.
have a question on that. We have
recruited 25,000 contact tracers,
however with the Test and Trace
results showing that a third of the
peopla who
people who are testing positive are
peopla who are testing positive are
not providing
people who are testing positive are
not providing any details for those
close contacts, is the system good
enough and is it up to scratch?
Robert, I will come to you on that
because we have had the figures out
today from Matt Hancock. Vaughan,
ran I start
can I start with you. Contact
ran I start with you. Contact
tracing has
can I start with you. Contact
tracing has been happening in Wales
for some time but what I do not know
is how many people are actually
is how many peopla are actually
being
is how many people are actually
being contacted and agreeing to hand
over their contacts,
overtheir contacts, is
being contacted and agreeing to hand
over their contacts, is that right?
We have not had a proper report at
all. I had a meeting about our
system today with our oversight
EWUP
group and we have had a good start
that partly because we have got low
numbers, less than 100 G infections
numbers, lass than 100 G infections
today and
numbers, less than 100 G infections
today and we don’t have any kind of
significant number of people not
significant number of peopla not
giving their
significant number of people not
giving their data, in the first week
of publication, there were 659
contacts identified and we gave
advice to 619 of those contacts,
that is a contact rate of 94% and we
that is a contact rate of 9496 and we
have an
that is a contact rate of 94% and we
have an effective system and we have
delivered that in partnership
between the National Health Service
and the authorities and I think the
question really describes the
position in England. In Wales, we
position in England. In Walas, we
have
position in England. In Wales, we
have been much more effective and
the challenge is how we continue to
do that as we progressively unlock
more activity when it is safe to do
so. Here in Wales, I think we have a
so. Here in Walas, I think we have a
good story to tell
so. Here in Wales, I think we have a
good story to tell about contact
tracing and I am proud that will
what we are doing to deliver that
service to keep Wales say.
m
Do you agree? We know that we had to
give up on targets because we know
they were impossible to reach on
testing. I would go back to the rush
testing on contact. We know
thousands of tests were taken away
from Wales by the UK Government and
for some reason I think the people
for some reason I think the peopla
of Walas
for some reason I think the people
of Wales deserve to hear the full
story of this, and yet I understand
you are not releasing the actual
e-mail
e—mail correspondence that was the
e-mail correspondence that was the
reason as
e—mail correspondence that was the
reason as to why we do not have
these tests in Wales. Over and above
that, representing highly rural
that, representing highly mral
area” and
that, representing highly rural
area,, and Betsy, the health board
area” and Betsy, the health board
has been
area,, and Betsy, the health board
has been in special measures for
five years, people cannot get the
results from their tests back again.
I am sad to say that we have had
lam sadtosaythatwe have had
these
I am sad to say that we have had
these stories, but when it comes to
people’s experience on the ground
and the critical way we need to get
people’s confidence back, they need
to see the test working, that is the
only way it will unlock people’s
confidence and unlock our economy.
There are facts to deal with their
if I may. when
if I may. When it comes to test
if I may. when it comes to test
results in
if I may. When it comes to test
results in Wales, over 90% of people
results in Walas, over 9096 of peopla
get
results in Wales, over 9096 of people
get their tests
results in Wales, over 90% of people
get their tests within 48 hours. The
idea this is widespread does not
match the facts. When it comes to
match the facts. when it comes to
our testing
match the facts. When it comes to
our testing capacity, the review I
ordered revealed we could not meet
those earty
those early aspirations because
those earty aspirations because
equipment
those early aspirations because
equipment was delayed in other
countries and some countries stopped
the export of testing equipment. We
are in a better place, we are well
over 12,000 tests. If that was for
the whole of the UK, we would have
capacity of well over 260,000 tests.
We have successfully implemented a
We have successfuuy implamented a
programme
We have successfully implemented a
programme and when it comes to test
results we are in a decent place,
but I want to see us get better
which will help us maintain public
confidence. I am committed to
understanding what we can do to make
understanding what we ran do to make
it better,
understanding what we can do to make
it better, openly publishing the
data we have, and to give that
confidence to people. The facts do
confidence to peopla. The facts do
not bear
confidence to people. The facts do
not bear out the comments Liz has
actually made. Contact testing was
started in Wales and stopped
immediately. The only place where it
carried on was Ceredigion where they
have had the lowest deaths in the
lowest rates. Let’s come back to
Shakeel’s question. As with every
part of the UK we stopped contact
tracing in the early part of the
tracing in the earty part of the
pandemic
tracing in the early part of the
pandemic because we did not have the
resources to carry on doing it. That
is the truth of the matter. I wish
we had greater capacity to make a
different choice, but we made
choices and we are making choices
now about how we keep people safe
and we are doing a decent
and we are doing a decentjob
compared to other parts of the
country. Let me go back to the
question, which is talking about the
25,000 contact tracers in England
with todars
with today’s test and trace results
with todars test and trace results
showing a
with today’s test and trace results
showing a third of the people who
tested positive are not handed over
their contacts to be traced and then
isolate. Is that good enough? I
think we can do even more. Let’s
think we ran do even more. Let’s
remember
think we can do even more. Let’s
remember that meant two thirds did
the right thing and of that two
thirds, 85% then confirmed they
thirds, 5596 then confirmed they
would
thirds, 85% then confirmed they
would self—isolate. That is nearly
would self-isolate. That is hearty
27,000
would self—isolate. That is nearly
27,000 people who will now have the
benefit of the system. What about
benefit of the system. what about
the
benefit of the system. What about
the third that Shakeel is talking
about? He is right to draw our
attention to the fact that there are
still people who are not
cooperating. Are you concerned? I am
concerned about that, it is all of
our collective duty to work with the
our collactive duty to work with the
authorities,
our collective duty to work with the
authorities, to do everything we can
authorities, to do everything we ran
to do our part.
authorities, to do everything we can
to do our part. We have got to get
the message over again and again
about the importance of sharing that
information and we share it in a
voluntary way, but we do it in a
spirit of collective coming together
spirit of collactive coming together
to fight this
spirit of collective coming together
to fight this virus. I think this is
to fight this vims. I think this is
only the first
to fight this virus. I think this is
only the first week. I mentioned it
simply because the minutes that came
out from Sage, the scientific body
advising the government, saying that
801: of
80% of contacts need to be traced in
8096 of contacts need to be traced in
order for
80% of contacts need to be traced in
order for this system to be
effective. If a third of the people
are not handed over their contacts
at all, you will not get anywhere
near that, will you? We need to do
better and I think in the first week
that is encouraging, but I very much
hope and I would expect that as we
all get more used to it, then the
new normal will start to apply and
peopla will
people will see the advantage in
peopla will see the advantage in
sharing that
people will see the advantage in
sharing that information and doing
the right thing, because
cumulatively, as we found in
lockdown, we can use this system to
lockdown, we ran use this system to
continue
lockdown, we can use this system to
continue the fight against the
vims.
virus. Ross. Do you think there is a
vims. Ross. Do you think there is a
correlation
virus. Ross. Do you think there is a
correlation between the confidence
in how the government has dealt with
this pandemic, connecting that with
the third that do not give any of
their details with the track and
trace? I love the fact he is calling
you Rob as well. Thank you very
much, a lot of people do. I think
much, a lot of peopla do. I think
that is an
much, a lot of people do. I think
that is an important point. He
talked about confidence. Is he
right? We have got to ask ourselves
the question are people doing it
because they do not want to
cooperate, they value perhaps their
own privacy? Or they have lost
tmst? I
trust? I am dealing with the point.
tmst? I am dealing with the point.
I think
trust? I am dealing with the point.
I think there is still, actually,
from all the evidence I am seeing a
high degree... People are not doing
it because the government are
telling them to do it, people are
telling them to do it, peopla are
doing it
telling them to do it, people are
doing it because they know from
their own information, research and
understanding that it is the right
thing to do. I never underestimated
the sense of the Welsh public or the
British public to do the right
thing. You will always have a
minority perhaps who will not, but
the majority can be trusted.
the majority ran be tmsted.
Frankly,
the majority can be trusted.
Frankly, rather
Frankly, ratherthan
the majority can be trusted.
Frankly, rather than blind trust in
Frankly, rather than blind tmst in
government,
Frankly, rather than blind trust in
government, the government should be
tmsting people
trusting people to do the right
trusting peopla to do the right
thing. what
trusting people to do the right
thing. What would Dominic Cummings
thing. what would Dominic Cummings
do? Let’s
thing. What would Dominic Cummings
do? Let’s not talk about individuals
now, let’s raise the level of the
debate stop let me get around the
rest of the palace. Bernadine, what
do you think? I think there is a
privacy issue and I think there is a
trust issue. I agree with Ross. I
trust issue. Iagree with Ross. I
have not
trust issue. I agree with Ross. I
have not taken my lead from this
government in terms of the pandemic.
I went into lockdown some ten days
before the government told me to
because it was glaringly obvious to
me that I should do. I might have
saved my life, I don’t know. I was
saved my life, I don’t know. Iwas
“P
up around
saved my life, I don’t know. I was
up around London on the tube all the
time. The week before I went into
lockdown the tube was heaving.
People are coughing and spluttering
People are coughing and splutbering
and sniffing,
People are coughing and spluttering
and sniffing, it was terrible. I do
know peopla
know people who continued to travel
know peopla who continued to travel
around
know people who continued to travel
around London who got the virus. I
around London who got the vims. I
did not
around London who got the virus. I
did not take
around London who got the vims. I
did not take my
around London who got the virus. I
did not take my leadership from this
government. We know about Boris and
him shaking hands with coronavirus
him shaking hands with coronavims
patients in
him shaking hands with coronavirus
patients in hospital when we all
knew you should not be making
physical contact with people. He did
physical contact with peopla. He did
later say
physical contact with people. He did
later say he was shaking hands with
the staff. Well, that is what he
said, that is what we perceived him
to say. So that was his leadership.
I think peopla
I think people are very suspicious.
I think peopla are very suspicious.
I think peopla
I think people are very suspicious.
I think people are making up their
I think peopla are making up their
own
I think people are making up their
own minds about what they are going
to do and not listening to the
government. We have to bring up
Dominic Cummings, who I am sure is
brought up a lot in this
programme... He certainly was at the
time. Look at his leadership skills,
although he is the man behind the
throne, the puppet master, but we
know what he did. It is a very
difficult situation, it is difficult
for peopla.
for people. Who do you listen to?
for peopla. who do you listen to?
Testing is
for people. who do you listen to?
Testing is one
for people. Who do you listen to?
Testing is one thing, tracking is
another, but it is the speed of
result of the test which is
important. I was desperate to get
back to work when I was tested, but
it took three days for my results to
come back. I was desperate because I
knew I was needed in work. But when
you hear stories like getting your
eyes tested by driving a certain
amount of miles, and the lack of
leadership. We are fortunate to have
Vaughan Gething here. Yes, the
majority of people might get their
results, but I think for health care
results, but I think for health rare
workers
results, but I think for health care
workers the speed of reporting
should be quicker. Not only that,
the results and the statistics we
the results and the statistis we
look for,
the results and the statistics we
look for, we need to have those
results quicker, we need to learn
from Korea where the results come
within a day. Then the track and
testing process is much faster with
isolation, so we needed to learn
much quicker from
much quickerfrom Korea and other
much quicker from Korea and other
countries
much quickerfrom Korea and other
countries that have dealt with it,
rather than wait for a lack of
leadership.
leadership. I am
leadership. lam not
leadership. I am not condemning what
the Prime Minister was ‘s aided, or
the other ingredients within the
whole recipe of protecting people. I
feel much safer with this to me to
mla over
rule over here, but then the lack of
mle over here, but then the lack of
PPE, and we
rule over here, but then the lack of
PPE, and we are hearing stories and
the report coming out about ethnic
minority doctors, why they are dying
more than others. These are issues
we need to have clear
recommendations to make sure we are
moving in the right direction. We
need to protect each and every life
that we can. Not
that we can. Notjust doctors, all
that we ran. Not just doctors, all
health
that we can. Notjust doctors, all
health care staff. Rocco. It is very
health rare staff. Rocco. It is very
peculiar this
health care staff. Rocco. It is very
peculiar this virus and that it
doesn’t affect everybody in the same
way. The week before I worked cheek
by
byjowt
way. The week before I worked cheek
by jowl with six
byjowl with six senior executives
in my office because we were
planning for the issues that we had
to face. None of them got the
disease. In my household which has
11 people and two children and we
11 peopla and two children and we
are all
11 people and two children and we
are all together in it, only four
peopla got
people got the disease. Why didn’t
people got the disease. why didn’t
the
people got the disease. Why didn’t
the others catch it?
the others catch it? I think a lot
of the modelling that is taking
place is based on assumptions that
are completely wrong. It is a new
disease, of course. I know, yes, but
500,000 deaths are based on a
computer model and false
assumptions. I am
assumptions. lam not
computer model and false
assumptions. I am not sure that
Niall Ferguson shares that view. I
am not sure the same would have
happened if we had locked down
eartier
earlier if the same assumptions were
eartier if the same assumptions were
put into the
earlier if the same assumptions were
put into the model. This illness has
not been known to science for more
than six months. We cannot say for
certain how it will pan out. We are
making the best assessments. This
whole two metre distance is based
principally on the Spanish flu, the
principally on the Spanish ﬂu, the
second
principally on the Spanish flu, the
second wave is based on the Spanish
ﬂu.
ﬂu, a
second wave is based on the Spanish
flu, a completely different disease
ﬂu, a completely different disease
to this.
flu, a completely different disease
to this. The last two coronavirus is
petered out on their own and that
would happen with this one. That
would be marvellous if that were the
use. I
use. lam
would be marvellous if that were the
case. I am not sure if there is
use. I am not sure if there is
certainty on
case. I am not sure if there is
certainty on that, but thank you. We
are out of time. Our hour is up.
Our audience tonight came from
Cardiff. We are doing a special
programme for the under 305 and no
doubt they will have a lot of
programme for the under 30s and no
doubt they will have a lot of issues
that affect their lives, the
economy, jobs, housing, and the
effects of coronavirus which will
affect their features and everyone
else’s.
else’s. We are taking applications
for that now, from across the UK.
Apply in the usual way on the
Question Time website. And don’t
forget Plymouth. We would like to
hear from
hearfrom people
forget Plymouth. We would like to
hear from people there,
hearfrom people there, whatever age
hear from people there, whatever age
you are. If you
hearfrom people there, whatever age
you are. If you want to carry on
tonight was much discussion you can
tonight was much discussion you ran
join Five Live
tonight was much discussion you can
join Five Live right now for
Question Time Extra Time. Thank you
for Vaughan
for Vaughanjoining us Dandelion and
for Vaughan joining us Dandelion and
to our
for Vaughanjoining us Dandelion and
to our audience from Cardiff. Lovely
to see all of you. Thank you for
watching Question Time. —— down the
watching Question Time. -- down the
line.
The people who took ill
are Sergei and Yulia Skripal.
Sergei was an MI6 agent.
What do we think it is?
We don’t know yet.
Novichok. A spoonful
could kill thousands.
Do not go in that house.
Repeat, do not go in that house.
Ourjob is not
to find out who did it
but to keep the people
of Salisbury safe.
What happened 7
Is he going to be OK?
I don’t know. We don’t know the
source of contamination or have an
established chain of events.
All we do know is that
for the people in Salisbury, we are
their only line of defence.
The Salisbury Poisonings,
across three nights:
Even a bad time at Glastonbury’s
better than a good time
anywhere else.
Seeing Glastonbury for
the first time’s mind—blowing.
The closing set at Block9, 2015.
I wish you could bottle that up
and take it away with you.
The sun’s shining and you’re
rocking it up here on the stage.
There’s no better feeling
in the world.
Let’s make it
a Glastonbury to remember.
Relive the best of the festival
on BBC iPlayer and BBC Sounds.
So, I’ve had an idea to save summer.
Introducing Cardboard Crouch.
Now I can be your
kickabout companion,
your mate with all the moves...
..your captive audience...
They actually get olives.
CROW CAWS
Tough Crouch.
..and much more.
Yeah, the BBC didn’t go for that.
So, we have come up
with a new show —
myself, Maya Jame,
Alex and his band,
packed full of music,
comedy and sport.
Hope you canjoin us.
From Monday, in England,
people will be able to get some
much—needed retail therapy,
because nonessential shops
are going to open as part
of the unlocking and no one needs
retail therapy more
than Chris Mason.
I know, I know.
Not being able to go to clothes
shops for three months?
My goodness me.
It’s been a dream for you!
It has been a struggle,
it really has.
This is going to turn
into a nightmare, because we have
hired a celebrity stylist to give
you some tips.
It is Gok Wan!
Hello.
Hi!
Hi, Chris.
I brought my comb.
Are you all right?
I’m all right.
Battling on.
Because you sound a bit nervous.
I have to be honest.
Are you nervous?
I am, I am petrified.
I really am.
I’m a little less than
a slave to fashion.
So, yeah.
I kind of disagree, actually,
because I am looking at two pictures
of you Chris right now and I have
to say, there is definitely a hard
and fast style stamp going on there.
0K.
We’re going to talk
about the first one,
with you with your flecked jumper.
Oh, yeah?
You know, with a full on collar.
And I am liking the fact that
you have got a little bit
of gingham poking through.
A bit of personality,
3 bit of colour, poking through.
I like the fact that
you are also owning the jumper,
you have got your arm up
on the side, you are smiling
directly at the camera.
You are owning the fleck,
every single fleck in that sweater,
so congratulations.
I love that.
Owning the fleck.
My Twitter bio is
changing by the second!
Can Ijust check, to reassure
viewers who might be feeling
a bit nervous about this,
that this is not suddenly
going to turn into an episode
of How To Look Good Naked?
Which was always the grand finale.
0K.
It is not How To Look Good Naked,
it is something else.
And just to sign off
on the second photo,
Chris, I like the hat,
I like the colour,
I like the texture,
I like the surprised expression
that is happening to you.
I am loving all of it.
Wow!
And we hope you love everything else
we are going to talk about on this
edition of the Coronavirus Newscast.
The Coronavirus Newscast
from the BBC.
Hello, it’s Adam in the studio.
And Laura in the studio,
two metres apart.
And Chris in his exclusive
fashion booth of news.
And Fergus in another studio
in New Broadcasting House.
Right, so Gok Wan has thoroughly
tested Chris Mason’s fashion style.
I don’t know if it was a positive
or negative result, everyone else
can be the judge of that.
But the nation is now being,
at least in England,
tested and traced to some extent
by the new testing
and tracing system.
Fergus, I’m going to do a big
old chat with you about the numbers
in a second, because it is worth
just looking at them in some detail,
but Laura, do they seem pleased
with how the first few weeks
of this have gone?
So, inside government,
I think there is a degree of relief,
because it has actually happened,
it does actually exist.
There is a sense that it has gone
a bit better than they thought,
in terms of the numbers initially,
but also a real acceptance
that it is not where it needs to be,
not by any stretch.
And the app, that a few weeks
ago was meant to kind